[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LIONEL FRIEDBERG: I had
an exorcism from a shaman.
This man, in Swaziland,
was a shaman--
>>GEORGE NOORY: Shapeshifted?
>>FRIEDBERG: --of some--
yeah, but he went on all fours
as though he was an animal,
as though he was a hyena.
And his eyes were blood red.
He just came along,
smelled me, detected
what was wrong with me,
and regurgitated up--
>>NOORY: And taking it--
>>FRIEDBERG:
--getting rid of it.
>>NOORY: That's right.
He was absorbing it.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yes, he was.
>>NOORY: Well, welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
We've got another
great guest for you.
Lionel Friedberg is an Emmy
Award-winning filmmaker
and a "New York Times"
best selling author.
His latest book,
"Forever in My Veins."
He grew up in South Africa,
began his career in 1961
at the first television
station in Central Africa.
His work includes
18 feature films
as director of
photography, shooting
on the soundstages of Hollywood
to the most remote and exotic
places on all seven
continents as a writer,
producer, and director.
Lionel, welcome to the program.
>>FRIEDBERG: George, It's a
great pleasure to be here.
Thank you so much.
>>NOORY: I have heard
so many good things
about you, my friend.
It is a pleasure to
meet you finally--
>>FRIEDBERG: Well, thank you.
>>NOORY: --after
all these years.
>>FRIEDBERG: Thank you.
>>NOORY: How did you get started
in this kind of business?
>>FRIEDBERG: Well,
I'll tell you.
I grew up in South
Africa, as you said.
And I always wanted
to make movies,
ever since my mother dragged
me to my first Esther Williams
movie when I was four years old.
>>NOORY: Oh my gosh.
>>FRIEDBERG: And
that was my dream.
And my passion was
to come to Hollywood.
But how to make that happen
was almost inconceivable.
Nevertheless, I grew up there.
And I grew up during
the Apartheid years.
It was an iniquitous system--
>>NOORY: Tough years.
>>FRIEDBERG: --and they were
very, very difficult years.
Because even as a kid, one was
very, very aware of the fact
that this divisive society
and this way of life, there
was something inherently
wrong with that.
And I was conscious of that.
And my father immigrated
to South Africa
from Europe, from Latvia,
and he was very unhappy
about that whole situation.
When I finished my
high school, my father
decided it's time to
leave South Africa,
to get away from this
Apartheid situation.
>>NOORY: He was done
with that, wasn't he?
>>FRIEDBERG: He
was done with that.
Now, he was trained as
a watchmaker in Europe.
And he took a job
in a mining town
way up in the northern part
of Africa, sitting down
at the southern border
of the Belgian Congo,
in an area called
Northern Rhodesia.
And he got a job at
a new jewelry store
there as a watchmaker.
>>NOORY: Huh.
>>FRIEDBERG: And when he
did that, I said, Dad,
I'm coming with you.
And my mother said, you're not.
You're going to get a university
degree and get a life.
And I said, no, I
want to go up there.
Because I'd been making
movies since I was 11.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>FRIEDBERG: I had a cousin who
gave me a little 8 millimeter
camera.
And I made movies about my
buddies and birthday parties
and sporting events
and whatever.
And so I had this dream of
making films about Africa--
"The African Queen,"
"King Solomon's
Mines," the "Tarzan" movies.
That's what I wanted to do.
And here they were going up
to live in Central Africa,
and I thought, here's my chance.
I mean, look.
How naive was that?
>>NOORY: Sure.
Well, but it showed guts.
>>FRIEDBERG: Anyway, so I
went up there with them,
and it didn't take me long to
realize that was a very, very
bad choice.
Because what was there?
Nothing but tiny little towns
and copper mines and jungle.
Bush from horizon to horizon.
>>NOORY: That wasn't it for you.
You were bored out of
your mind, weren't you?
>>FRIEDBERG: Exactly.
So what to do?
So for the first couple
of months, I would--
I bought myself a little car.
And I would go into the
bush and photograph old--
in African villages
and some of the culture
that was going on there.
It was still very,
very traditional, other
than the people who worked
in the copper mines.
And it was wonderful,
but that wasn't a career.
And then one day
in the newspaper,
it was like manna from heaven.
I saw a little ad looking for
staff for a new television
station.
>>NOORY: Ah-ha.
>>FRIEDBERG: Now,
this was the first TV
station in Central Africa.
The money came from South
Africa and from Britain.
And they were building it there
because the miners were crying
out for entertainment at night.
They had money to burn--
>>NOORY: Of course, and
there was nothing to do.
>>FRIEDBERG: The copper
prices were high.
And so they decided to put
up this television station.
And, for me, it was
like manna from heaven.
So I knocked on the door
and I said, I need a job.
I'll do anything.
I'll clean the windows--
>>NOORY: How old were you?
>>FRIEDBERG: I was
like 16, 17 years old.
>>NOORY: OK, just a kid.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah.
I mean, I'd finished
high school.
And they gave me
a job in the props
room taking care of props.
And after six months, I
said to the studio manager,
it's enough of that.
Please put me behind
one of your cameras.
And we had interesting
programming.
We had programming for kids
in the morning in vernacular
languages.
>>NOORY: And it was all live?
>>FRIEDBERG: It was all live
because there were no teachers.
There was a shortage
of teachers.
So we had live programming
for kids in the morning.
In the afternoon we had what
was called cultural programming
for local tribal groups
who lived in the community,
in the area.
And we'd have people arriving
with drums and rattles
and grass skirts.
It was incredible.
It was this multidimensional
world of cultures.
Because at night, we had "Leave
it to Beaver" and "Bonanza"
and all of that.
>>NOORY: Oh, you brought in some
of the United States shows, OK.
>>FRIEDBERG: At night for
the white miners, yeah.
So we had this
wonderful mixed world.
And it was a great
place to work.
And I got a job behind the
camera after six months
because the studio manager
knew about my background
as an amateur filmmaker.
And he said, all right,
get behind the camera.
See what you can do.
And I did, and he said,
right, we'll keep you on.
You can be a cameraman.
>>NOORY: Fascinating.
>>FRIEDBERG: And that was
the start of my career.
>>NOORY: I love that story.
>>FRIEDBERG: And
I had no inkling
as to where that would take me.
The first three years
were absolutely wonderful.
And then, remember, it was 1961
when all this was happening.
I was there for
like three years.
And the British empire was
falling apart at the seams.
All the European powers were
giving up their colonies
in Africa.
The Belgians had
given up the Congo.
And Britain had now started
giving up Ghana and then
Tanganyika and Kenya.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>FRIEDBERG: And now it was
the turn of Northern Rhodesia
to become the
Republic of Zambia.
And the minute that happened,
and the local government
took power, they
nationalized the station.
Which was understandable.
The country belonged
to these folks.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>FRIEDBERG: And so it was
time for them to take over.
But, of course, the
problem for me what was--
>>NOORY: What are
you going to do?
>>FRIEDBERG: --I going to do?
Yeah.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>FRIEDBERG: And we had a
guy working for us at home.
I was still living with my
folks because I couldn't afford.
They paid me a
pittance, you know?
I mean, I was a young guy.
And we had this wonderful
young man, a Bemba guy
by the name of David Phiri.
And the next day I said to him--
when I got the
pink slip the night
before, all of us at the
station got a pink slip
from the government
to say, you've
all done a great job,
that thank you very much--
>>NOORY: Thank you, but goodbye.
>>FRIEDBERG: In three
month's time, goodbye.
And I thought, what am I
going to do with my life?
Where is the road to
Hollywood from here?
So I told this guy who
worked for us, David,
I said, David, a terrible
thing has happened.
I've been fired.
And he said, what
are you going to do?
And I said, well, I may have
to go back to South Africa.
There is a film industry there.
And he and I used to talk
about photography a lot.
His dream was to have his own
wedding photography studio.
And I said, but I
don't really want
to go back to South Africa.
What should I do?
And he thought about
this, and he said,
I'll find someone for you.
I had no idea who
he had in mind.
What would he know anyway
about a future for me?
>>NOORY: You found out.
>>FRIEDBERG: A couple of
days later, he came along
and he said, on
Thursday afternoon,
we're going into
the bush, and we're
going to meet someone who may
have some answers for you.
And, for me, it
was the beginning
of an unbelievable series
of adventures and insights
into a world that I had
no inkling of whatsoever.
Because there we were, we
were driving in my little car
to this little
village, and he knocked
on the door of a
little hut in there,
and this little
old woman came up.
She was Bemba, of the
Bemba ethnic group,
and she was all hunched
up and wrinkled.
She was ancient,
spoke no English.
>>NOORY: 90 years old probably.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah,
or more, or more.
And not only that, but
she'd probably never
been more than 10 miles away
from this little settlement
where she lived.
And I thought, where
has he brought me?
Anyway, we went inside.
And she told to David
to tell me to please
sit down on the floor.
It was very spartan furnishing.
And there was a grass
mat on the floor.
And we sat down there.
And on the scratch
mat was a little bag,
a little animal skin bag.
And I sat down there, and
she looked at the bag,
and she looked at me
and she said, to David,
and she said, explain to him.
She said, tell him to pick
up the bag and blow into it.
>>NOORY: Into the bag?
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah.
Which I did.
I picked up the
bag, I blew into it.
And then she took some snuff,
which is ground up tobacco
leaves, and she explained
to him she said, to him,
this is an offering
to his ancestors.
Because his ancestors are here.
His ancestors who came before
him are going to help him today
find his way.
And that's the offering
we make to them.
I had no idea what--
>>NOORY: And you're
watching this going,
what the heck's going on?
>>FRIEDBERG: --any
of this meant.
This was like straight
out of witch doctor land.
You know, those serials that
I used to see at the movies?
I mean, it was amazing.
I had no idea what this
held for me at all.
And she said to me, turn the
bag upside down, which I did.
And what spilled out
onto the grass mat
were all these little bones
and stones and little items
like beads, glass--
>>NOORY: All over the place?
>>FRIEDBERG: All over the place.
And the paradigm that these
people use-- because obviously,
I kind of figured out that
she was a shaman of some kind,
but really not being
too sure of it at all.
But that's what she clearly was.
And the paradigm
that these people use
is that they use bones as
a method of communicating
with the ancestors.
>>NOORY: I remember a
movie called "The Viking"
with Kirk Douglas.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yes!
>>NOORY: And some
little old lady
was crying out to
Odin, throwing bones.
>>FRIEDBERG: Exactly
the same deal.
Exactly the same thing.
And the way these bones fall--
and they have to come from
certain animals, by the way.
A lion, the hyena,
a goat, I think
from a certain type of antelope
plus whatever else the shaman
uses as part of his or her kit.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>FRIEDBERG: And she
threw these bones
and she leaned over like
this and she peered at them,
and she started to try
to make sense of them.
Now, the whole--
>>NOORY: By the way they--
>>FRIEDBERG: The way they felt--
>>NOORY: --configured.
>>FRIEDBERG: --the way
one bone crossed another.
It all meant something to her,
but it was more than that.
She was obviously seeing
things that I was not seeing.
>>NOORY: No, of course not.
>>FRIEDBERG: She
looked at it like this
and she suddenly
said, oh, what are
these bright lights in my eyes?
And I looked at David, and David
looked at me, he said to me,
she wants to know what
these bright lights are.
>>NOORY: And you're
saying, what bright lights?
>>FRIEDBERG: It's the
place where you work.
And I suddenly thought,
wow, she's seeing the lights
in the television studio.
>>NOORY: Aha!
>>FRIEDBERG: If this
woman is seeing that,
and I'm not seeing
that in the bones,
and she's never met
me before, I better
listen very, very carefully
to what she has to say.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>FRIEDBERG: This
woman obviously
has powers that I
don't understand.
And she opened up a
whole world for me.
She basically told me
how my life would pan out
for the next 60 years.
>>NOORY: And she was
right, wasn't she?
>>FRIEDBERG: She was spot
on about everything--
about my marriage, about
how many kids I would have.
And the strangest thing
was, that she said to me,
don't worry because
you are going
to go across the
very, very big water,
and you will go
into that direction.
And she pointed to the north.
I had no idea what that meant.
And she made a lot
of other predictions,
and they all came true.
And I'll give you a
couple of examples.
She said, one day, you
will work in a world
where there is no color.
It is all white.
The whole place is white.
No color at all.
You will go there for your work.
And when you eventually cross
the big water to the north,
you will work in a place where
there are more big lights.
And there are very
famous people.
>>NOORY: Hollywood?
>>FRIEDBERG: I wasn't making
any sense of all of this,
but I'm desperately trying
to make notes, as David
was translating for me.
She said to me, you
will meet a man one
day who knew the most
evil man who ever lived
in the history of the world.
That scared me like
you have no idea.
>>NOORY: My god.
>>FRIEDBERG: What is
she talking about?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>FRIEDBERG: She said you
will go, as part of your work,
into the bush one day, and
there will be a great beast.
And you will almost
come very close to dying
because of this beast.
>>NOORY: And obviously
that happened?
>>FRIEDBERG: What
did she talk about?
And so as the years went by,
all these things came to pass.
The great beast was an
elephant that almost killed me.
>>NOORY: Trampled you?
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah,
on a safari film
that I did with the inventor of
the Hula Hoop and the Frisbee.
He went out there on safari with
two buddies from California.
I was hired as a cameraman
to photograph the safari.
And the one guy shot at
an elephant and missed,
and the whole herd went--
>>NOORY: They went crazy.
>>FRIEDBERG: --crazy.
And there was a cow who had
a calf with her, a baby.
And when she saw
this guy with a gun,
she came running
straight towards him.
And my shot was--
>>NOORY: They know.
>>FRIEDBERG: --right behind him.
He was in front of
me like this, and she
came running towards us.
She wanted to kill him.
He ran out of picture, and
I was rooted to the spot.
I couldn't move.
I was absolutely terrified.
Besides it was a
heavy film camera,
and there was a
battery attached to it.
>>NOORY: They were
very, very big.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah.
I couldn't move.
And all I could hear were
people saying, run, run, run!
I couldn't move.
And at the very last moment, the
white guy who ran the safari,
he shot her right--
>>NOORY: Oh, no.
>>FRIEDBERG: --between her eyes,
and she died maybe 6 feet away
from me, and saved my life.
And I suddenly
realized when that
happened, that that woman
had foreseen that event.
As she had foreseen the
fact that I had eventually
left South Africa in 1966,
moved to the northern hemisphere
by sea.
You went by sea those days--
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>FRIEDBERG: --not by air.
And it was early
one night, I was
sitting on the top
deck of the ship going
to Southampton from
Cape Town, and the sky
would change every night.
>>NOORY: Where you could
see every star in the sky.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah.
The southern stars
were disappearing,
and the northern stars
were making an appearance.
And, for me, it was
like, oh my god, I
am traveling across this
planet, from south to north.
And it hit me
then-- she saw that.
This old lady
foresaw everything--
>>NOORY: Amazing.
>>FRIEDBERG: --that
happened in my life.
The white world, by the way,
that she talked about, in 1991,
I was on an expedition
to Antarctica doing--
>>NOORY: All snow, right?
And there you go.
>>FRIEDBERG: Well, ice, yeah.
I was doing a show for PBS.
And I went up there one night--
it was Christmas Eve in 1991.
The captain stopped the
ship, full of scientists.
We were doing investigations
into global warming.
And, too, are the seas
becoming more acidic
because of human activity?
You can see all that
in the Antarctic.
And it was Christmas Eve.
The captain stopped the ship--
party time-- and it was
in the southern hemisphere
in December, so it was
perpetual daylight.
And I decided to go
and sit on the top deck
after I had a couple of drinks
with the guys downstairs.
And I was making my notes, as I
did every night as a filmmaker.
And I suddenly tried to
describe the world I was in.
And I said, I'm like in a
translucent, white egg--
>>NOORY: Which is what
she basically said.
>>FRIEDBERG: It's
nothing but white,
and that's exactly what
this lady had foreseen.
It was incredible
what this woman saw.
>>NOORY: And it just dawned
on you-- she was right again.
>>FRIEDBERG: Exactly.
All of these things
dawned on me.
I didn't expect them to happen.
I only realized when they
did happen how right she was.
And it made me realize
these folks know
more than I can understand.
>>NOORY: They're very
tuned in, somehow.
>>FRIEDBERG: And what is the
system that they are using?
What is it that gives
them that power?
them that insight?
Here is a person
with no education,
never been anywhere in her
life, living under a thorn tree.
How does she know this stuff?
And that, for me, was
an absolute revelation.
And I kept that thought in
mind for the rest of my life.
>>NOORY: Is that what led
you to write this book?
>>FRIEDBERG: That's what led
me to write this book, "Forever
in My Veins."
And the title
comes from the fact
that her predictions
is it basically
comes from an African paradigm.
And as I am from Africa,
the essence of Africa
is very much in my
veins to this very day.
>>NOORY: Did she
predict the disease?
>>FRIEDBERG: She
predicted that I would
get very, very ill one day.
And my goodness, she was
absolutely spot on because--
>>NOORY: Oh my god.
She was right about that, too.
>>FRIEDBERG: In
the mid '90s, I was
diagnosed with this chronic
kidney condition that
almost killed me.
And nothing was working, either.
Nothing was helping.
Nothing.
And I had a friend
who was a surgeon
living in Santa Barbara.
And he was also from South
Africa, he was my age.
And he said to me
one day, he said,
Lionel, nothing's
working for you.
Can I make a suggestion?
And I said, what?
He said, you know, I'm
studying the shamans of Africa,
what they call sangomas.
Sangoma is a Zulu
word which means
like soothsayer,
opener of the truths,
being able to foresee things.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>FRIEDBERG: I'm
studying the teachings,
the practices of sangomas in
South Africa because I want
to know why these medicines
that these people concoct from
berries and roots and herbs
and whatever else in the bush--
>>NOORY: They work.
>>FRIEDBERG: Work.
They actually work.
How come?
We've got big pharma here.
How come that stuff that
they make by going out
into the field, it works?
I'm studying that.
And he said, I've got
a suggestion for you.
I'm going out there
in a couple of months.
Why don't you come with me?
Maybe one of those
shamans might have
some idea as to how to help you
cure your kidney disease, which
is what I had.
>>NOORY: And he saved your life.
>>FRIEDBERG: And
that's, I think,
what actually did
save my life was to--
>>NOORY: I want to show
you a clip of Robbie Holz.
And she talked about how
she healed herself when
Western medicine could not.
From Gaia's "Open Minds."
>>ROBBIE HOLZ: Most people
are not supposed to be sick.
Sometimes it is part
of your soul's destiny.
I needed to go through that
to put me where I am today.
Often children
are born that way.
Babies come in
with these things.
But most of us are not
supposed to be sick.
Our bodies are just crumbling
under the emotional weight
that we're putting them under.
So that's important, is that
you have the ability to heal.
More than likely you
are supposed to heal.
Know that.
Get your power back.
That's the fourth step of the
"Aboriginal Healing Secrets"
is, take your power back.
If I had believed what
the doctors had told me,
that this is incurable, you'll
have it the rest of your life,
I probably wouldn't have
made it another 10 years.
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
And nor would Gary
have made it an extra 12
years had he believed that.
>>HOLZ: No, no.
And now I've since
healed that hepatitis.
The doctors have tested me every
year for at least eight years,
and I have not had it.
I don't have it, I'm cured.
So these things are doable.
It's only what they
know at the moment.
So that's really important
to keep that in mind.
>>NOORY: So you
go back to Africa,
and you talk to a shaman.
And what do they give
you, some potion?
>>FRIEDBERG: Well, she's
absolutely right what she said.
She said the doctor sees what
the doctor sees at the moment.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>FRIEDBERG: They
don't see the whole.
They don't see the whole
entity of who you are.
The shaman does.
The shaman has a far more
embracing perspective,
I think, of who one is.
Whereas Western medicine
teaches you, they heal the ear,
they heal the eye, they heal
the nose, but not the whole.
And they don't take into account
the spiritual aspect of who you
are, whereas the shaman does.
And the shaman also
consults the ancestors.
Is there anything
in your lineage
which may be able to be tweaked
and corrected to help you
with your current illness?
And I want to tell you
that my nephrologist in LA,
and I had the best care in the
world, he said, in 10 years,
you are either going
to be in dialysis
or you're going to be dead.
>>NOORY: Oh my god.
>>FRIEDBERG: And
that's 30 years ago.
>>NOORY: And here you are today.
>>FRIEDBERG: And it's the
African paradigm that actually
has brought me this way.
>>NOORY: What did
they do for you?
>>FRIEDBERG: They did a bunch
of really amazing things.
They gave me herbs and
powders in which to bathe.
I started ritual bathing once
a week with little things
that they gave me
to put in the water.
>>NOORY: Anything to ingest?
>>FRIEDBERG: They did.
While I was at their
villages, they did.
But not to bring back to LA.
>>NOORY: Did you
start feeling better?
>>FRIEDBERG: I started feeling
very, very strange when
this first started happening.
It was like I didn't quite
understand what was going on,
but I knew something cathartic
was happening to my body
when they started
dealing with me.
But the most
extraordinary thing was
I had an exorcism from a shaman.
He basically-- this man
in Swaziland was a shaman,
and he became another entity.
It's almost as though he took
on the being, the essence of--
>>NOORY: Like he shapeshifted?
>>FRIEDBERG: --some-- yeah,
but he remained who he was.
But his eyes were blood red.
He was dressed in all
his tribal regalia.
It was absolutely
magnificent in this mud hut.
And he went on all fours as
though he was an animal, as
though he was a hyena,
and he came up to me
and he smelled me.
And when he came to my kidneys,
he vomited into these--
>>NOORY: No!
>>FRIEDBERG: --barrels.
He vomited--
>>NOORY: Without really knowing
what was wrong with you?
>>FRIEDBERG: Without having a
clue what was wrong with me,
he vomited this ghastly,
yellowy, slimy stuff--
>>NOORY: Ugh!
>>FRIEDBERG: --into these
barrels, as though he had
taken something out of my body.
And, again, this guy
didn't even speak English.
He just came along,
smelled me, detected
what was wrong with me, and
regurgitated up this evil--
>>NOORY: It reminds me
of "The Green Mile."
Remember that movie?
>>FRIEDBERG: Exactly
like "The Green Mile."
>>NOORY: He had stuff
coming out of him.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah,
exactly like that.
And, obviously,
what he was doing
was picking up on
negative energy.
He was picking up--
it wasn't like a traditional
exorcism, such as Linda Blair
went through in the movie.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>FRIEDBERG: He was picking
up on negative energy that was
inside me--
>>NOORY: And taking--
That's right.
He was absorbing it.
>>FRIEDBERG: --and
getting rid of it.
Yes, he was.
And how do these
people know this stuff?
Well, this goes back
thousands of years.
These folks have been
doing it forever.
>>NOORY: Tell me about your
TV special, "Beyond Death."
>>FRIEDBERG: "Beyond
Death" was a show
that I did for cable
television in the '90s.
And the premise was--
well, the instructions
were no ooga booga stuff and no
haunted houses, none of that.
We want science.
You go out and find
people who really
have had near-death experiences
and who can tell you
about their experience.
>>NOORY: With the
science behind it.
>>FRIEDBERG: It was
a two-hour special.
But in the process
of making that show,
I met extraordinary people,
including Robert Jahn,
who ran the Princeton
Engineering Anomalies Research
Unit at Princeton University.
I went to the Monroe
Institute in Virginia.
These people do phenomenal work.
>>NOORY: Was Robert
Monroe alive at that time?
>>FRIEDBERG: He was not.
He'd passed on.
>>NOORY: He died, yeah.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah.
But it's all to do
with consciousness.
So the idea was what
happens to consciousness?
What is your consciousness?
Your consciousness
is your personality.
Is it your soul?
Is it your spirit?
Is it the essence of your being?
And what is it?
It's not just thoughts going
on in synapses in your brain.
>>NOORY: There's something more.
>>FRIEDBERG: There's
something more,
and it does exist outside
of the physical body.
This we proved.
>>NOORY: Did you look at
reincarnation, too, Lionel?
>>FRIEDBERG: And we absolutely
looked at reincarnation.
>>NOORY: I want to show you
a clip from Gaia's "Legacy"
of the historical Dr.
Raymond Moody, who
talks about reincarnation.
>>FRIEDBERG: Great guy.
>>RAYMOND MOODY: Reincarnation
was there at the beginning.
Plato was a reincarnationist
and had some very brilliant
perceptions, I think, about
the reincarnation process.
One of them being that he
made an articulate statement
about why we don't
remember our past lives.
And what he did was
he formulated it
in terms of an experience
that every one of us has had.
And it's called in
psychology an event boundary.
What an event boundary
is, is an event boundary
has to do with the fact
that the mind puts things
into little packets
for processing.
And when you get
out of that packet,
you may not have access
to that information.
And the most common example is
that you're in the living room
and you think of something you
want to get in the kitchen.
So what happens is as soon
as you go through the doorway
into the kitchen, what?
You forget what you
came in there for.
And that's an event
boundary, and Plato
articulated how that is
involved in the reincarnation
experience.
>>NOORY: He's spot-on, isn't he?
>>FRIEDBERG: I think
absolutely spot-on.
In reincarnation, there's
no question of that.
And Robert Jahn said to me, when
I'd finished interviewing him
at Princeton
University-- and this
is a guy who's an engineer.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>FRIEDBERG: And he said
we are here for a purpose,
and we are here for
a learning purpose.
The body is purely a vehicle.
We are only here-- that this is
the method by which we learn,
pick up these experiences.
And the purpose of
it is to actually
learn something, to improve
on the soul, on who we are.
And in reincarnation
is how we do that.
We go from body to body to body,
as we pick up stuff as we go.
And I have no doubt
that is the case.
You know, the Africans
don't believe in that,
but they have the
same kind of concept.
Because we talk
about the ancestors.
The ancestors are always
there and they're accessible.
>>NOORY: Hasn't
pharmaceutical companies,
haven't they gone to
places like Africa,
look at what the shamans
are doing, and recreate it
and make it synthetic?
>>FRIEDBERG: That's
exactly right.
Where do we get most
of our medicines?
Most of our medicines
come from nature.
>>NOORY: And plants.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah.
I mean, they got--
>>NOORY: The aspirin came
from the willow bark.
>>FRIEDBERG: Precisely.
I mean, they go into
nature to find their drugs.
And by picking up the
wisdom of the local people--
whether it's South
America or whether it's
North American Native
Americans here,
the original folk who
lived in North America
or back in Africa--
they're picking on what a
wisdom that these folks already
know about.
>>NOORY: And what does
this tell you, Lionel,
about this planet
that has on the planet
remedies for
diseases that happen?
I mean it's an
incredible design.
>>FRIEDBERG: It's amazing.
It's extraordinary.
And I think my years
of making documentaries
on all kinds of subjects,
working with NASA
and doing ethnographic
filmmaking,
and all that kind of
stuff that I've done,
has taught me that there's more
to this world than we know.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>FRIEDBERG: I mean, there's
just absolutely no question
about it.
When you think about the
work of Dr. Emoto in Japan
and his work with water, and the
fact that water molecules can
be changed purely by
thinking about it--
>>NOORY: That's
right, bombarding it
with nice music or
evil music, basically.
>>FRIEDBERG: Exactly.
There's so much more
that we don't know.
And I think, you talk about
big pharma, some of them
may know about this stuff, but
they keep it to themselves,
right?
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>FRIEDBERG: Because
they're in business,
and it's good for
business to not
make it generally available.
I think it's almost
like energy devices
when you go into
the UFO community.
We may know stuff
that extraterrestrials
have given us, but heaven
forbid that should go out
in the mainstream.
Because we have the oil
companies to deal with,
and we have the automobile
and that's not good
for business if we
can find a way of not
polluting the Earth
and not using fossil fuels.
So there's all of
this in the way.
Commercialism and
all that stuff often
stands in the way of things.
We've done wonders.
We've done wonderful things,
and the medical fraternity
certainly has.
But there's a little bit
of jealousy going on there.
Some things are held back
in order for their profits
to continue to happen.
>>NOORY: Well, because there's
no money in natural remedies.
>>FRIEDBERG: There we go.
Yeah, I mean, if
Tesla was right,
we wouldn't be burning
fossil fuels at the moment.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>FRIEDBERG: That's not good for
business for the oil companies.
>>NOORY: When
Westinghouse backed Tesla,
they couldn't figure out how to
make money doing it because he
kept talking about free energy.
>>FRIEDBERG: Exactly.
>>NOORY: Just take it
out of the atmosphere.
>>FRIEDBERG: Exactly.
I think all of these
things are possible.
And we are capable of
so much, but we're only
allowed to know so much.
There's a boundary,
there's a barrier.
And I think it's built into
the educational system.
>>NOORY: You know the
work of Dr. Joe Dispenza?
>>FRIEDBERG: Yes.
>>NOORY: In the Gaia
program "Rewired,"
he talked about how you can
change your physical body just
by thinking positive.
>>FRIEDBERG: Absolutely.
>>JOE DISPENZA:
People are living
in the routine of the
predictable future,
or they're memorized to
emotions of their past,
and they can't think or act
greater than how they feel.
Then those series of
events in their lives
has began to influence
their gene expression.
Then once the gene
has been signaled,
and the person is
constantly living out
of homeostasis or
balance, that imbalance
becomes their new balance.
And now the internal
environment of their body
is sending specific
signals to the cells,
and the cells are getting
the same instructions.
And the same instructions
produce the same proteins.
And now the person begins
to experience ill health
or disease.
So I became very
interested in this topic
because I started reading
research where scientists
were taking people that
had Type 2 diabetes
and exposing them to
an hour of comedy.
And when they rated the comedy
show, many of the participants
rated the show on
a scale of 1 to 5.
A 5, which means for a whole
entire hour they laughed.
But what they were measuring
before and after the comedy
show caught my attention.
Because they were
measuring gene expression
to see if changing
their emotional state
was able to, in one hour,
select and instruct new genes.
And, in fact, over 20
genes were upregulated just
by people changing their mood.
So by changing their
internal state,
they were able to
select and instruct
new genes that
made new proteins.
People began to function with
diabetes within a normal range
or slightly elevated
blood sugar levels
compared to where
their blood sugar
levels were every single day.
>>NOORY: I think Dr.
Joe's right on, Lionel.
>>FRIEDBERG: I think
he's absolutely
spot-on with all of that.
Absolutely, there's no
question about that.
It's all to do-- and
the mind over matter,
we can change ourselves.
There's no question about that.
>>NOORY: I think that's what
you did to yourself in addition
to the help they give you.
>>FRIEDBERG: With some help from
some very, very wise people.
And some of the
wisest people I know
live on mountaintops and out
in the middle of the boondocks,
not necessarily from
academic institutions.
I've learned so much from people
like that, that I have exactly,
probably reconfigured
my own body
in a way that's helped me
to cope with my illness.
>>NOORY: I think--
>>FRIEDBERG: It's extraordinary.
>>NOORY: --the fact that he
got sick and vomited out energy
that he was picking up from you.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah, there's
no doubt about that.
And I'll tell you something.
And another interesting
thing, I mentioned earlier
about that elephant that--
>>NOORY: And it knew.
It knew what was happening.
>>FRIEDBERG: That elephant,
when that incident happened,
I felt a very, very
strange thing happen to me.
It's almost as though
the soul of that elephant
and my own consciousness, if
you like, melded together.
Because every time
I went to a shaman
and they threw the bones
for me, they always said--
and I've seen about 30,
40 different shamans
in my life, sangomas.
>>NOORY: That's a lot.
>>FRIEDBERG: They
throw the bones,
and the very first thing they
say is, you have protection.
There is something
protecting you.
Why is there an
elephant around you--
>>NOORY: Really?
>>FRIEDBERG: --all the time?
>>NOORY: And how
would they know this?
>>FRIEDBERG: Exactly.
The essence of that being is
around me and protecting me,
as well as the
wisdom of the few.
>>NOORY: Why you?
>>FRIEDBERG: I
don't know, George.
I have an affinity with
the non-human world.
I think one of the reasons
that I think that I'm here
is one of the lessons
I think I have
to learn in this lifetime
is one of compassion.
We need to get on a little
better with our fellow beings
than we do at the moment.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>FRIEDBERG: The way we
treat the animal kingdom,
for example--
>>NOORY: It's horrible.
>>FRIEDBERG: --is
absolutely atrocious.
And it disturbs me deeply.
And I have that
connection with the animal
kingdom all the time.
Did she know that,
that elephant?
Is that what inspired
me to feel this way?
I don't know.
>>NOORY: Well, the fact that she
charged the guy with the rifle
tells me it knew
that it was in danger
and tried to protect her baby.
>>FRIEDBERG: Her baby.
Her baby was in danger, yes.
And when she was shot,
she knew that I was not
the one responsible
for trying to kill her.
It was the other guy.
But she was shot in front of
me, and she has been with me
ever since as a protector.
I know that.
I have elephants
all over my office.
It hangs from my rearview
mirror in my car.
They're everywhere.
>>NOORY: That's something.
>>FRIEDBERG: Yeah.
You know, the spirit world
is something that I really
think we know so little about.
There is a whole realm, a
whole universe out there
that we are blind to or not
sufficiently conscious of.
And I'll tell you a
really interesting event
that happened.
When I was doing a series
called "The Tribal Identity"
for television
back in the '70s--
it was an ethnographic
series on all the tribes
of Southern Africa.
It was absolutely fascinating.
And this is where I met a number
of other sangomas, many, many
of them, and lived with people
going through initiation
rites in the bush.
It was extraordinary.
It was an amazing experience.
And one of the events
that we had to cover
was an offering
to what was called
the great spirit of the
Venda tribe in South Africa.
They live right up on the
northern boundary near Zimbabwe
near the Limpopo River.
They are wonderful people.
And they have a
wonderful tradition.
They have a wonderful culture.
They have wonderful music.
And they have a profound
spiritual belief.
And once every five years,
they make an offering
to the great spirit of the
tribe to keep the tribe safe,
to keep the people safe.
And it fell into the
timeline of our production.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>FRIEDBERG: And so we went
up there to cover this event.
And the old guy who
arrived to do the ceremony,
he was absolutely ancient.
He must have been about
a hundred years old.
And he came down to the lake.
And there were a
number of other people
from the tribal area
who came all dressed
in their tribal regalia,
beads, and grass
skirts and whatever else.
But this old priest
arrived to do the offering
to the ancestor.
And I had a host,
who was a white guy,
he was an anthropologist
presenting the series,
a man called Peter Becker.
A wonderful guy.
And when we got
down to the lake,
it was regarded as
sacred territory,
we had to take off our shoes.
Remember what it
says in the Bible,
take over thy feet from
the land upon which
thy stand as it's holy ground?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>FRIEDBERG: You know, the
Hindus take off their shoes,
the Muslims take
off their shoes.
It's a tradition in
so many cultures.
>>NOORY: Take it
off in your house.
>>FRIEDBERG: In your
house, too, yeah.
And so these people said,
take off your shoes, please.
You're on holy ground here.
Which we did.
And my host, Peter Becker,
took off his shoes as well.
And he was going to be
in front of the camera,
and the old priest in the
background over there.
So I had the shot of
Peter here, the old priest
in the background, and
the sacred lake shimmering
over there.
And Peter was going to
explain what this old man was
doing as he was doing
these incantations
and chanting to the lake.
But he stubbed his toe on a rock
and he went, ouch, ouch, ouch.
And the sound man
started giggling.
And then the assistant
guy started giggling.
And you know what it's like when
you start, when that happens.
>>NOORY: It's infectious.
>>FRIEDBERG: It's
infectious, it spread.
So we all started kind
of stifling our laughter.
It was funny.
And the old priest could
not hear any of this.
He was like 30 feet away.
Now, that was bad behavior.
And the old priest
was going like this,
making his incantations
to the lake.
And the minute we started
laughing, his hands dropped--
>>NOORY: He thought you
were laughing at him.
>>FRIEDBERG: --he turned
around, and he looked at us,
and at that very moment,
the camera stopped running--
>>NOORY: Whoa.
>>FRIEDBERG: --the Nagra tape
recorder stopped running.
There was no power in anything.
It was like we had a blockage.
>>NOORY: He shut it down.
>>FRIEDBERG: And so
I said to our fixer--
we had a guy there called a
fixer, you know the guy who
fixes things up for you?
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>FRIEDBERG: I said, please
go and ask him if you could,
whatever it is, could
he stop until we fix--
>>NOORY: Get things going again.
>>FRIEDBERG: --the problem here.
So he went to the
priest and he said,
these guys, the film crew,
would like you to please wait.
And the old man--
and he was old, he was
like a hundred years old--
he said, no, they have
offended the ancestors.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>FRIEDBERG: And
the ancestors do not
want them to photograph
them because they are not
behaving properly.
And they have blocked--
they cannot do it because
of them, the ancestors.
And I said, you are kidding me.
>>NOORY: A fascinating story.
>>FRIEDBERG: And Peter
and I looked at each other
and we said, there's more
going on here than we know.
There's something
very, very supernatural
happening here at the moment.
Please offer our apologies
to the ancestors.
We did not mean to offend them.
And the fixer went back
to the priest and said,
these guys are very, very sorry.
And the old man just nodded
like this, turned around,
held up his hands, and started
his incantations again.
And, of course, needless
to say, at that moment,
the camera starts running
again, the sound--
>>NOORY: Remarkable.
>>FRIEDBERG: --system
starts running again.
There's power in the mics again.
Everything's back
to working order.
We were blocked by some
kind of supernatural force.
>>NOORY: It's real.
>>FRIEDBERG: It is real.
It is absolutely real.
>>NOORY: Lionel, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>FRIEDBERG: Thank you,
George, it's been a pleasure.
>>NOORY: This is
an amazing person
who has been into
the African grounds
and has seen the other side
through the eyes of a shaman.
It's remarkable.
It saved his own life.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[MUSIC PLAYING]